
                InterGif Viewer 1.06
                ====================

        by Peter Hartley (K) All Rites Reversed
    Acknowledgements to authors of SESanim and ReplayGIF

INTERGIF VIEWER is a program for displaying animated GIFs. It
will also display sprites (except deep sprites), Draw files, and
most files produced with Iota Software's (commercial) animation
program The Complete Animator. It has been designed to work
alongside InterGif, the animated GIF creation program.


        Get the latest version
        ----------------------

The latest versions of InterGif and InterGif Viewer, plus more
help information and full source code for various platforms, are
always available on the World-Wide Web at the address
        http://utter.chaos.org.uk/~pdh/software/intergif.htm
It's the tenth of December, 2000, as I'm writing these words: if
it's long after that that you're reading them, you might want to
see if there's a later version now available.


        Distribution
        ------------

InterGif Viewer is NOT COPYRIGHTED and is NOT distributed under
the GNU General Public Licence. For full information read the
file !IGViewer.Copying or go to the Web site.
    InterGif Viewer is mine: in particular, it doesn't belong to
SonicBlue or ANT Limited. If it gets anything wrong, it's my
problem, not theirs.
    In order to display Draw files you will need Acorn's Drawfile
module. This is not included in InterGif Viewer distributions, and
ftp.acorn.co.uk isn't there any more; try doing a Google search
for drawfile.arc (Hensa or Sunsite might have it).


        Features
        --------

  o Well, only one really: it shows animations.

  o Oh, thought of another one: it anti-aliases Draw files for
    you, like InterGif does. It does need lots of memory to do
    this, though.


        Limitations
        -----------

  o InterGif Viewer is built mostly from the same code as
    InterGif itself, and so it shares InterGif's limitations.
    Principally, these are an inability to load:

      * Deep sprites
      * Animator files in deep modes
      * Uncompressed or delta-compressed Animator files
      * Any animation with more than 256 distinct colours
        in total

  o Sound effects in Animator files are not played.


        Desktop use
        -----------

Run !IGViewer and drag your sprite file, Animator file, Draw
file, or GIF onto the icon bar. A viewer will appear, with play
tools if your animation has more than one frame. Select-clicking
on the < and > icons plays the film backwards or forwards
respectively; Adjust-clicking steps by one frame backwards or
forwards. The end icons take you to the first or last frame of
the animation. More than one animation can be loaded (and
playing) at once.
    As you've probably noticed, the icon bar menu has a "Web
site" item. Choosing this takes you to my Web pages on ANT
Limited's server, as described above. For this to work, you need
to be connected to the Internet, and also have a Web browser
loaded which understands ANT's URL broadcast message -- for
example, Fresco or ArcWeb. (Probably the others too, these days.)


        See also
        --------

    The InterGif page
        http://utter.chaos.org.uk/~pdh/software/intergif.htm
    The Complete Animator
        http://www.iota.co.uk/animator/


                                                 pdh@chaos.org.uk
                                              10th December, 2000
